
However after the first 10 minutes or so it starts to get pretty horrible.
Again is this just a poorly designed way of forcing the player to sit through all of the credits rolling incredibly slowly? Or, is this some sort of meta discussion of the purgatory that we all experience when talking about post-credit scenes in games and move … I don't kno … Point is Kojima Syndrome.
And every time you get transported back after a few minutes, Amelie will show up and present a cut sequence where she offered some exposition.
Again, I'm glad that all of this is here and that it is expositive and there are reasons that all of this stuff in this world take place.
But I think it could have been done much more efficiently.
Now before* all of this happened to end up talking with Amelie at length, and there is what VICE referred to as "the gameplay mechanic of the year".
Thank You Ryan on Twitter for sending me this, I thought this was pretty funny.
Basically Amelie describes that she's going to end the world and that you can stop her, or you can not, and let it happen.
Of course most players are gonna try to stop her, but … I don't know.
Let me know what you did below Point is you have a gun, and you can choose to shoot her or you can run after her and hug her, which is what VICE referred to as the mechanic of the year.
Now she gives a bunch of forewarning and she says that you should have known how this was going to play out and you know what to do, because it's the entire point of your journey.
And looking back on it, it makes sense.
She's saying that it's all about connecting people forgiving and embracing others.
So going up to her and hugging her seems like the natural choice.
However, this didn't work for me at all.
And I hesitated, and I even tried to save, because I decided immediately after she said I know what to do, to shoot her six times and empty the gun in the back of her head, which doesn't actually do anything.
At which point I ran up to her to try and punch her into submission to stop the world from ending.
But that also didn't work.
And instead I was prompted with a hug button.
At which point I pressed hug and I was made to feel as though I just made an incredible and generous decision when in reality it was kind of an accident.
Now maybe I'm the weird one here.
But this made the ending sequence really awkward, Because it feels as though I kind of broke it.
It didn't expect me to shoot her in the back of the head, empty my rounds, and then go up to her trying to punch her, only to find out my only option was to hug her.
It was completely unintentional that I saved the world which made this all VERY FUNNY.
But after all of this, you are saved and the world doesn't explode and everything's okay.
At which point you're eventually saved by all of the people that have helped you this far.
Fragile, Deadman, everybody.
And this is actually what those people off in the distance on the Beach are.
We saw this in a trailer way back in the day a couple years ago and it seemed as though it was an explicable how they ever explained these people just floating over the ocean.
But they actually do explain it, and it's kind of cool.
And after this, Sam is saved.
You're brought back to the world of the living.
You go to a presidential inauguration for Die-Hardman, and you get some more exposition.
But eventually you find out after giving the president a pep talk, that you need to take BB to the incinerator because it passed away.
Or I guess in Deadman's words, it is no longer functioning.
And I'll be honest Kojima actually wrote this pretty well.
The player had built a relationship with BB, having carried it with him for almost the entire game, save for the sequence where it's removed from you.
And it's sad to be walking this deceased BB or dis-functional BB, however you want to phrase it, off to an incinerator, to have it burn.
It's kind of a sorrowful event.
But I will be honest it's actually kind of cool to walk back through where you started.
For those of you not aware, this is the exact same path that you walked with Bridget Strand when she died to take her to the incinerator.
So effectively the last mission of the game is mirroring order three, which is COOL.
Because that was basically the first order that you completed yourself.
There are no MULEs, no BTs, no threats, you're just hiking along a large green mountainside, and it's a nice way to finish.
But once you arrive at the incinerator a cutscene begins playing which you a new perspective on the smaller cutscenes that you've seen throughout the entire game every time you had a load screen coming out of a private room for instance.
Now we get a new perspective, and we see all of these sequences play out in order.
And it's actually pretty heartbreaking.
This is the place where Mads Mikkelsen actually earns his game Award for Best Performance.
He really nails it here.
It's beautiful, it's sweet, it's sad, it's endearing, it's … everything.
It's incredibly emotional and I really enjoyed this.
But after all of this ends and you learned that the BB was Sam, and that Clifford was just trying to correct his mistakes from his past.
Everything comes back into the world of the living.
And you realize that Lou has been taken out of the pod and is now cradled in Sam's hands.
He's frantically trying to revive her doing everything that he possibly can to wake her up.
However, nothing seems to work, and he eventually gives up, cradles her as he begins to cry.
At this point after a brief beat, you start to hear Lou crying.
She's back.
Sam is stunned and holds her in unparalleled jubilation as a bunch of BTs watch them from the background which is actually pretty cool because it seems as though this is what has broken the cycle of all of these BBs, having their souls effectively destroyed in the incinerator.
Holding Lou, Sam walks out of the incinerator into the open air, and it's actually raining, although the timefall doesn't seem to be having any sort of effect.
It's just normal rain.
Furthermore there is a full rainbow behind them which is extremely bright.
And also shows the color blue which is something that none of the other rainbows in the game show.
Now what does all of this mean? Well it seems as though the Death Stranding has officially come to a close.
And BB's revitalization has effectively restored the stability of humanity … or … something.
However I will be honest this is so vague that there are probably a million different ways to interpret it.
And it's not particularly important because everyone will have their own interpretation which is kind of the point.
What I will say is that it's a very calming peaceful and emotional end even if I don't completely understand what's going on.
Why was BB able to be restored even though necrosisation was starting to set in.
BB was clearly dead, what brought her back? Why does the timefall all of a sudden end at this point? Why is blue all of a sudden present in the rainbow just because a baby came back to life? I'm not … entirely sure … But again that's probably not the point.
I would be interested however in hearing your theories as to what exactly happened when BB was saved here.
I'm sure some of you have thought this through and have a reasonable explanation.
I would love to hear it below.
And then the actual credits roll.
And after all of that happens, we are greeted with episode 15 prompted up to us, and a quick reading that shows two weeks before.
And this is what I meant earlier when I said that chapter 15 is basically indefinite.
It goes on forever even though it's just two weeks before the presidential inauguration.
This is effectively Death Stranding's endgame state.
It goes on forever and it will allow the player to continue making deliveries, five-star locations, find and hunt down all of the memory chips, and complete any other things that they might have left undone.
Now overall the story while it is kind of bizarre and crazy, it is thought through, and it does have justifications and rules that govern it, which is what I said at the beginning I was looking for.
However there are a couple of missed opportunities I can't help to wonder why Kojima didn't explore more.
They might have been that it just felt like it wasn't focused, or it might have been something that never occurred to him, I'm not entirely sure.
Specifically something such as the discussion that has to do with BB's and slavery.
This is briefly touched on but it's not really elaborated upon.
Specifically, babies come from mothers who died while pregnant, which is why those mothers are called still mothers.
There are also other times that this concept is applied within the world of Death Stranding, such as with mama, who we know was to give birth but was trapped in rubble after the Death Stranding which resulted in the baby becoming caught between the world of the living, and the Beach, or the world of the dead.
This is of course why BBs are able to detect BTs and can show them to the operator that has them strapped to their bellies.
Now while Kojima does have a lot of writing in here, that discusses the inherent value of human life even as a baby, he never really touches on the idea that you are literally taking an independent human as prisoner, and you're going to dispose of them once they're no longer useful As Deadman says, it's a tool.
And they don't really explore this very much.
They do touch on the idea pretty aggressively that the BB is becoming sentient, the BB is becoming human.
And it's going to start growing like a regular human very soon.
This is of course why Deadman has to take the BB away from the player roughly halfway through the game in order to perform an operation to separate it from the humanity that's pulling it out of the world of the dead and closer to the world of the living.
And this is what partially makes me think that Kojima had thought of this and simply decided to focus on the more pro-life discussion having to do with the BB's, the idea that these infants still have value as human life even though they're just infants.
They're contained within a tank.
They don't have much of anything by way of autonomy, but they still are valuable.
So it could be that Kojima just decided that the discussion on slavery would have been too much and wasn't worth pursuing.
Or maybe he just didn't think to add it in, I'm not entirely sure.
Either way, it could have been cool to see him explore the idea of BBs being enslaved to a more powerful master, and not having any way of fighting it or claiming their own independence.
I'm not really sure let, me know your thoughts below.
Another thing that struck me is weird throughout the course of the story is the fact that they break the fourth wall all the time.
And I'm not entirely sure why.
Now of course you could say that this is just Kojima style and that's what he likes to do.
So to judge it is simply unfair.
However as I discussed earlier, the world that Death Stranding is taking place within has to be consistent and it has to live by its own rules, preferably, at all times.
And for the most part it succeeds in this.
The game seems to want players to be immersed at all times with the realistic graphics and the traversal system being very realistic.
But at the same time, Sam breaks the fourth wall constantly.
Though, in fairness, it is mostly relegated to the private room.
It feels weird.
Ride with Norman Reedus AMC as an ad on the bathroom while he poops, it's really weird and out of place, I'm not really sure why it's here.
Plus if you leave the camera sitting on him too long, he'll gesture at you, and he'll stare at you, make funny faces at you.
It's fun, but it's weird.
If I were directing the game, I would have cut all of this.
Because in my opinion, it's not worth the trouble.
It pulls the player out of the game.
And while you are in a private room when these things happen, I don't think that that's an excuse.
Though I will admit that this is probably a matter of personal preference.
Some people will mind it such as myself, others don't mind that at all and some I'm sure really enjoy it.
Now of course these fourth wall breaks and these think outside the box mechanics are nothing new to Kojima.
As somebody sent me on Twitter, Metal Gear Solid has a sequence like this when snake is fighting Mantis.
You actually have to change the port that the controller is connected into in order to complete the game and continue on, which is kind of funny, imagine doing that today.
It's weird, because Kojima talks about being an artistic purist and describes how he thinks Americans don't have artistic sensibilities.
But he's the one putting paid product placement in his games with the Monster Energy drinks and the AMC ads.
Can you imagine what people would say if Todd Howard started putting Tesla ads in Fallout or Elder Scrolls.
People would rightly lose their minds.
The only reason Kojima gets a break, is again, Kojima Syndrome.
Now don't get me wrong, fourth wall breaks can be done well, even in narrative focused games.
Look at The Lost Legacy tower sequence for instance.
Here there's a tower you can find and there's a very narrow route that you can climb up optionally.
And if you get to the top of it and you hang out there for an extended period of time, Chloe will start to tease you, and will actually break the fourth wall However, things like the otter hat that you get from Conan O'Brien within Death Stranding are somehow both weird and perfectly in place, it's really bizarre.
But you can't help but feel as though Kojima didn't take all of this very seriously which I also too appreciate, I mean their video games.
And all customization is like this from changing paints to glasses, to Otter Hoods.
It's all fun.
And though it doesn't mean much in the story it's a welcome addition even if it doesn't make sense in terms of Bridges having standardized uniforms that everybody is expected to wear.
But the point is, while the fourth wall breaks may bug me, I can understand why they might not bother other people.
I think it is a matter of personal preference.
It just bothers me, though it might not bother you.
But with all of that, let's discuss the gameplay, and the systems that make Death Stranding work.
So obviously a lot of people have said that Death Stranding's gameplay loop is quote-unquote "BORING".
To determine if this is true, let's look at what your average mission is going to be comprised of.
Let's start with story missions.
In this case we're going to look at a random order in the mid-game.
Now in this order we have 60 minutes to collect medical devices from one character in the mountainous area and then deliver them back to the area where we accepted the order.
In other words, a fetch quest.
Now this is actually one of the more elaborate order types that you can get because it involves multiple stops.
Simpler orders just give you items with the destination.
So you accept the order and get told that you need to deliver the items quickly.
And furthermore that the items that you're picking up are classified as "fragile", which means that you can't drop the packages, often you can't go in water, etc.
Basically you have to be extra careful.
You select your gear and load Sam up with any ladders, PCCs, climbing anchors, extra boots or weapons that you may need.
Then you set out and you begin hiking.
In this case I'm not going to use any vehicles because we're going through a mountainous area and they aren't particularly useful in this rocky snowy area.
This is what would usually be considered a more difficult mission.
Specifically because it's in the snowy mountainous area.
Not once in my over 100 hours with Death Stranding did I encounter a mission where I failed the time limit.
The only time I had any difficulty was when the items were fragile, or when I was completing multiple orders all at once, loading up with four or five orders at a given time.
And so the way that the game dynamically alters the difficulty is with the routes that they'll have you do.
This is why long routes tend to reward you with more likes and routes that go into the mountains also do the same.
Now you can unlock certain items that makes node-traversal and mountain traversal easier, for instance, lots of ladders, climbing anchors that you can level up, power gloves, the all-terrain exoskeleton, and of course the zip-lines which you can use to set up routes after you've initially explored them.
So with all this in mind I continued hiking, eventually I reached a cliff top, where I could have just dropped a ladder or a climbing anchor to descend and then cross by foot.
But I happen to know that this area is infested with BTs.
So I decided to build a zip-line which allowed me to completely skip this area, which effectively skips five to ten minutes of navigation.
Don't worry, we're gonna go into a lot of detail with these zip-lines in just a bit.
I reach to the bottom and continue hiking.
Eventually I pick up the items, and then the entire process repeats as you're return.
Now when you drop off the items you are graded on the condition that the packages are in.
This can be both the quality of the outside container, in addition to the quality of the internal item which can experience damage if you aren't careful.
For instance, if you fall off of a ladder, you'll fall, take damage, and the packages will be worth less when they're eventually delivered.
There are however ways to deal with this.
For instance with the timefall shelters if you stay in them and especially once they're upgraded, they'll actually repair your items as you stand underneath them.
There of course also the cargo repair sprays which you can carry on your back.
But this is basically it.
There isn't much more to the gameplay system other than this.
I know it may come as a surprise, but Death Stranding is not a third-person shooter.
It's also not a monster fighting focused game, which means that all of the combat encounters that you'll experience are pretty clunky.
And I don't know about you but every time I went to one of these flashback sequences with cliff, I was really excited, because they're very visually impressive.
You get to travel back to World War one or World War two or Vietnam.
It's very interesting visually.
But once you actually engage with the gameplay, you realize that it's just a shooting gallery, and it's not a particularly difficult one.
Even on the hardest possible difficulty, it doesn't change much.
Really, as long as you're keeping cover and shooting the enemies when they appear, which is all the time, you're gonna be fine.
Now as you would expect with the story, the game heavily encourages you to make sure that you're never using actually lethal means of taking down opponents, that you're only using non-lethal means.
For this reason, they include non-lethal assault rifles, which basically completely negates the difficulty that would have been put in place by having a non-lethal requirement.
Basically, these are still guns, they just don't finish the opponent in a death state.
Instead, they're in an incapacitated state, which allows you to just continue on your merry way.
I don't know why they did this because it seems to undermine their own pursuit of making sure that the player needs to take a step above everybody else.
The player needs to have non-lethal means of interacting with enemies such as the MULEs because they're better than the MULEs.
But instead, you just use assault rifles that incapacitate them, which completely eliminates any gameplay difficulty that would have been there as a result of taking a stealth approach or a peaceful approach.
But rest assured, this idea of the game undoing itself is something we're going to talk about much more in just a moment.
But while discussing these deliveries, it's also important to discuss the map design.
Now in my mind this is probably the most important game design element that is here.
The mechanics of walking balancing, and using vehicles can all be fantastically well-designed.
But if the world itself is not worthy of being explored, nobody's gonna care.
Now like I said before, there are very FEW inherent reasons to explore the world of Death Stranding.
There are no major secrets, no NPCs, and only a very few select secret locations and items to find that make the player excited and wanting to explore more.
For instance, in Red Dead Redemption 2, there are all sorts of dynamic encounters that you can either choose to interact with or not.
But the world is littered with them which means that every time you go out to explore the world, you're going to find something new and interesting.
It's one of the reasons the world of Red Dead Redemption 2 feels so alive.
My favourite example in RDR2 would of course be the incestuous siblings, where I was just riding through the map and I encountered this brother and sister who were … very close.
They try to kill you and a bunch of really funny and interesting stuff goes down.
I won't spoil it, but I highly recommend hunting them down if you ever in that world.
Or another example would be the puzzles and encampments that are hidden all over Breath of the Wild.
They make the world worth exploring for its own sake.
Now there are things in Death Stranding to find, I can already hear you saying it.
Things such as the memory chips and the hot springs, but I don't think these actually qualify.
And I'll explain why in just a moment.
The main thing to understand is that the world of Death Stranding isn't particularly well crafted, at least in my opinion.
And I have a lot of math to back this up.
In fact, it seems to me that this map was dynamically generated with very little input on the part of the development staff, and they just went with it once they found a random arrangement that they liked.
Once they had this, they decided to scatter all of the flat areas with boulders and streams.
And I have to ask why.
Seriously, you will be hard-pressed to find any stretch of grass that's more than a hundred yards.
These rocks after all take a positive action to create.
Somebody has to put them there.
So clearly there must be some reason as to why that individual was instructed to put them there.
And to me it seems pretty clear.
They're just there to break up the monotony, and to make traversing a conscious activity.
And they also are there to make vehicles far more difficult to use.
This is because if vehicles become too useful, the deliveries cease being an engaging experience where you're engaging with the world looking around and interacting with it, and slowly begin to be a matter of tedium.
After all, if all you need to do to make a delivery is hop in a car and drive from one location to the other, why do you need to build and upgrade the roads? Why do you need to build zip-lines? There would be no reason to, which is why you have to drop boulders on the ground to make cars and motorcycles just annoying enough to use that it would be more useful to spend the time upgrading roads and zip-lines.
Now for those of you who followed this channel for a while or have seen to my older videos, you will know that I do a series where I break down the density of a game world.
Basically I will take a selection of gameplay that's two or three hours long, and I will chart out how much time is in between moments of interest.
How I define moments of interest is something that changes my thought process.
So if I'm exploring the world, and I see an animal run across the screen in Red Dead Redemption 2, something that catches my attention and changes my thought process, that qualifies.
But some things such as just avoiding a tree while riding a horse wouldn't qualify, because that's something I can do passively.
Now granted this is an incredibly subjective way of measuring these types of things, which is why it's something that I do myself.
I don't use data from other people, or other people's gameplay.
This is only from me, so it would seem in my estimation that that alone would serve as a fairly good control.
Now all of this started back with The Witcher 3.
The designer said that they were aiming for anywhere between 30 and 40 seconds between moments of interest.
If they hit that number, then they would know that the world was dense enough to hold players attention while feeling expansive.
And in my testing, The Witcher 3 does in fact adhere to that rule.
And I've tested a lot of games in this way.
Zelda: Breath of the Wild, Skyrim, Fallout: New Vegas, all of them.
I even calculated this for Red Dead Redemption 2 which had the longest time between moments of interaction.
But the quality of those interactions were much higher.
For this reason I decided to make these same calculations for Death Stranding.
Because it seems to me, that this world doesn't feel anywhere near as alive or interesting as the world of Red Dead Redemption 2, Zelda: Breath of the Wild, or even Fallout: New Vegas.
So I broke the map into three broad areas where a lot of orders are going to be taking place.
Snowy areas, greenery laced late game areas, and stream heavy areas where vehicles are usually going to be used, but their batteries may drain quickly.
For these I used roughly two hours of gameplay footage, timed out the moments, in between moments of interest, and then I paused the timer whenever I was interacting or dealing with something that engaged my interest.
So for instance if I encountered a MULE that started attacking me, I would pause the timer while I dealt with that threat.
And once I began exploring again with a clear mind, I started the timer.
And this is the data I collected, now do you notice anything? It looks completely randomized.
There are a couple of exceptions here and there, such as when I was navigating a very dense area and it required a lot more of my attention.
But broadly, this is incredibly random.
In fact looking at the standard deviations and the kurtosis of the charts, it seems to me it is randomized.
This is something I haven't seen in any of the aforementioned open-world games.
All of those had very intentionally placed items and dynamic interactions.
They were placed and designed in such a way that they would intrigue the player, and they would be paced out in such a way that the player would always have something tickling their fancy.
However, the world of Death Stranding is completely randomized.
Everything here looks as though, it was dynamically placed with almost no effort put on it from the developers.
There's no careful crafting of routes, there's no trail building to give players a clear way of going, there's nothing like that in this world.
It literally looks as though it was just randomly generated and left alone.
Again I can't express how insane this is for a $60 title in 2019.
In my opinion, it's straight-up unacceptable.
Now I can't help but also feel as though the world of Death Stranding is made in a much more realistic way.
In other words, it is random.
It isn't carefully crafted by developers to enhance the experience of the player.
But the point is, we're playing video games here.
This is in the real world.
And if you're going to try to improve the experience for the player, you are going to need to enact some positive actions.
But even with this data staring them in the face, I guarantee you there will be people who will defend this.
They will say that this more realistic way of designing the world was intentional, and it's good, because the world itself is more realistic.
And exploring it and navigating it is more realistic, which is the point of Death Stranding blah-dee-bloo-d'blah-blah … Again, Kojima Syndrome.
This is straight-up unacceptable in a AAA game in 2019 when this released.
It's not good, this is laziness personified.
And frankly, this explains why the world does feel so empty.
The design wasn't carefully crafted or arranged.
Sure, MULEs and BT zones are permanently placed and those don't change.
But rocks, ledges, routes and everything else in the world that you explore seems straight-up randomly placed.
I also did some further calculations on the placement of the items that you can find throughout the world.
Such as other zip-lines the players have crafted, generators, and the like, and believe it or not these are also pretty much random.
There are a couple of constraints that seem to be put in place such as a limitation on how many of a single item can be in a given area.
So for instance you can only have one online generator within a certain radius of another generator.
But in general, this is all randomly spawned in with the limitation of chiral volume and those distance limitations that I just mentioned.
This is laziness, and I don't know how anybody could defend it.
Again the question is is, this just a team that was too small? Or was incapable technologically of dealing with this? Couldn't craft it more carefully? Or maybe they just decided it wasn't worth crafting it more carefully? Who can say? Whatever the excuse, in practice, the design of the world is random, and it's lazy.
Now speaking of Chiral bandwidth, I have to ask, why? Why is this a thing? Chiral bandwidth is the system, by which the game determines how many of a certain item or a collection of items you can craft.
Want to build a zip-line network that's massive and expansive and spans the whole map? Too bad! Because you have Chiral bandwidth to adhere to.
This is basically their version of a carry weight limit, for items you need to craft, even though there also is a physical carry weight limit, but you get what I'm saying, it's stupid.
It's just a way of controlling density and increasing tedium.
If you want to build a bunch of zip-lines, you have to go delete other zip-lines in order to build new ones.
The question is whether this was a technical limitation? Something where they couldn't handle more of a certain item in the world or if it was a design choice? Again, Kojima Syndrome.
There were many times when I was building a massive zip-line Network and I was limited because of this bandwidth.
Now sure, as you upgrade certain areas and new 5-star new locations you will increase the bandwidth that you're playing with.
But it's never unlimited, and you never have the ability to build to your heart's content.
There is always this arbitrary limitation and it is very frustrating.
Now it seems to me that this was probably put in place to make you reliant on other players.
In other words, if you can't build an unlimited number of zip-lines, then you're going to have to rely on online generated zip-lines as well.
And other things in the game do this as well.
They make you reliant on other players and their work.
Examples being exoskeletons having batteries, motorcycles and trucks all needing batteries as well.
In order to charge these up, you need generators.
And dynamically in the world there are many online generators placed in highly trafficked areas.
This is something that makes you feel as though you need other people in order to continue exploring even though you could have just charged it up yourself with a generator you built, it makes you feel as though you're all working together, which is a cool mechanic to have, and it does work in making you feel as though you're all working together.
But there is a side effect to this mechanism, and that's specifically that these batteries just feel tedious.
Especially when you consider how small the charge on these batteries actually are even in the long-range version of the vehicles.
Building generators for these just feels like busywork, it's not actually fun.
Let me share with you the exact moment I was completely fed up with batteries and that system within this game.
I was driving this truck with a huge amount of cargo loaded in the back.
I dropped by one location, I loaded it up, fully charged it, and then head out onto the plains.
And this is a futuristic truck with a fully charged battery.
But this thing has an operating distance that is so low, it would make a first-generation Tesla blush.
Seriously, this is where I started … and as I drive, and drive, and drive, and drive, not even going very far … this is where the battery dies … in the middle of the stream.
The car immediately starts freaking out, it pushes me out, and then, instantly, the car disappears and all of my cargo floats downstream.
And this was so much cargo I couldn't possibly load it up onto my back.
And it all drifted out into the water, and was ruined.
This was well over a thousand likes, instantly lost and several deliveries instantly failed, due to a stupid mechanism just designed to make you engage in this tedious gameplay cycle of building generators to charge batteries, to get to another generator to charge your battery, so you can move on.
In no way is this realistic.
And that's the other question, if this world is designed to be realistic, and that's your excuse as to why the world design is so crappy, then why are batteries and things like this so clearly gamified in order to make you engage in the gameplay system? It's not consistent.
If you're going to make the gameplay systems realistic and lifelike, do it.
Don't do this half-assed thing, otherwise it just ends up being frustrating, and forcing the player to wonder whether or not you had any idea what you were doing.
Now another feature of the world are the memory chips.
There are 56 of these and they're hidden in very random places with almost no visual cues.
Now the first time you hear about these is when you receive an email in Chapter 3 from a character named Nick Easton.
In it he describes a quote-unquote "weird glowing thing" that he wants you to find in Capital Knot City's isolation ward.
And these emails are actually the only thing that pushed you towards finding these chips.
It's not really a concern in the main story.
Now I ran around for hours and hours collecting these.
Even the one in Higgs' secret room that doesn't unlock until after fragile deals with him … on the Beach.
And the question is whether or not these are busy work just designed to pad out a platinum run or if these are placed in the world as a reason for you to explore it, and to hike through, trying to find every single one of them.
Now to me it seems pretty clearly that it's the former, not the latter.
And to prove this I'm going to show you some examples.
These are some of the more commonly collected ones.
So if you've yet to find all of them, don't worry, you can still hunt them down and have a good time, for what it's worth.
When you go to the weather station, there's one, placed on a concrete ledge.
Okay you run past this, frequently enough, I think I'm fine with this one.
This one, however, is along the red wall.
It's not an area you would ever be running by.
There's no reason for you to explore this area.
And even once you get there, it hides very very well.
It's hidden in the truck bed, of this area, you have no reason to go to.
This one I'm less okay with.
And it doesn't seem as though it's hidden in a way that encourages you to explore the map.
It's hidden in a way, that encourages this busywork type of gameplay.
This is another one that I'm actually okay with.
It's hidden in an underpass by Mama's base.
This is something that I did stumble on too while exploring.
I didn't have to read any email cueing me to this area.
So obviously I'm okay with this one.
This is one I'm not okay with, it's on the hood of a semi Shore.
It's outside of an area you're going to be trafficking fairly frequently, but you can't normally climb onto vehicles.
You have no reason to ever climb onto a vehicle.
So the only reason you would hop up on this is if you scanned it, happen to spot it, and jumped up to grab it.
There's no reason for the player to be looking up here or looking for memory chips in this area.
This is something that you would just stumble onto, or would find if you were cued on to it.
There's this one in the back corner of the loading zone room.
It's just sitting on the floor.
Now fair enough, if you go back here, you're going to spot it, so it's fairly easy to find.
However, the player has no reason to ever go back into one of these areas.
It's just placed here, and you're expected to figure that out for reasons, even though there's never anything else placed in these back corners in any of the other loading zones.
There's this one in the snow field, just sitting on top of a collapsed pillar.
This is one that you would probably find during normal gameplay, especially because this is a BT heavy area, and this is a zone where you're going to be crouching and stealth in your way through.
So I'm actually ok with this one, this one makes sense.
This one's in a cave and this cave is actually marked with a ton of signs as a timefall shelter.
So it's also likely that you would probably encounter this one through regular gameplay, even though I didn't.
But the one I like by far, the most, is the one hidden in Higgs' secret room.
This is in the top right corner of the central zone of the map.
It's basically Higgs' center of operations.
It's a really cool hidden area, that I like a lot.
This is really cool that they included this here, even if some of the quotes scribbled on the wall are kind of … funny and … weird.
I'll just say it again, I really like this.
And I really wish there were more things like this, hidden and scattered throughout the map.
If the map were littered with things such as this, the player would have a reason and an excuse to explore for the sake of exploring without any deliveries strapped to their back.
Just going through the world for the sake of interacting with it.
But at last, as far as I'm aware, this is the only thing like it in the game.
Now it's pretty clear to me that these are supposed to be hunted down with emails that you receive in the game, which is obviously true.
Because many of these chips won't actually spawn until you've received a given email describing them.
So clearly they want you to be interacting with the emails, and using the emails to find them.
For example, the memory chip The Walk doesn't actually unlock until you've leveled up the First Prepper, one of the most isolated individuals in the entire game.
And because you're supposed to rely on these emails, I think it's fair to say that these are here to encourage you to read through the emails, not here to encourage you to explore the world.
The last thing that I can think of that would encourage you to explore the world for the sake of exploring it would be the hot springs.
These are something that are briefly mentioned and they're kind of cool.
Basically there's six by my count in the middle zone alone.
And they allow you to hop in.
And there's regenerative qualities to them.
And … though it is cute because you hop in and you chill with your BB, I never really felt the need to use these or hunt them down intentionally.
When I encountered one I would hop in, but that was really the only time I ever use them.
Again, I'm glad they're, here but this is by no means a reason to explore the map.
It's just six things that sit on the map, that are kind of fun when you find them.
But you'll forget about them within 50 feet.
The point of all of this is to say that the world design of Death Stranding is so incomprehensibly bad.
I don't really know how to explain it other than pure laziness.
Hell, my degree is in Corporate Finance.
I'm not a specialist in game design, but all of this is pretty basic to me.
And the fact that Kojima Productions can't manage to follow any of the basic practices of AAA open-world game development.
It's completely baffling to me.
If you have an explanation for it, I would love to hear it down in the comment section below.
Regardless, one of the other common accusations that's levied against Death Stranding is the idea that the gameplay is purely repetitive and there's no reason to engage with it because of its repetitious nature.
And on the macro level I think that is fair enough, which is why I ran through the basic outline of a quest earlier in this section.
However, on the micro level, is where I would slightly disagree.
Because while you are going to be repeating the same basic macro process of delivering items from one location to the other, you are going to be using a plethora of different tools in order to achieve this end.
Whether you're walking, using motorcycles, or trucks, ladders, climbing anchors, bridges, or zip-lines, pretty much across the board you're going to be using a plethora of different tools.
All told it is repetitive in the purest sense of the word, but what game isn't.
In Red Dead Redemption you're going to be engaging in gun firefights and riding your horse.
That's pretty much it.
In The Witcher 3, you're going to be talking with people and sword-fighting.
Sure occasionally you're also going to be crafting things but that's also true of Death Stranding and even with Red Dead Redemption 2.
Every game has a set of gameplay mechanics that they're going to repeat, rinse, repeat, rinse, repeat, over and over and over again.
After all it's kind of the definition of a video game.
To me, the problem isn't with the fact that the gameplay system is repetitious.
The problem is that the orders while being repetitious require you to go over areas that you've traversed time and time and time again.
It ceases to be interesting after the first few times, especially once you've built items that help you get over this, such as ladders, climbing anchors, bridges, or zip-lines.
They completely negate the need to engage with the other elements of the gameplay loop, and end up just turning this whole process into a tedious one, instead of one of exploration and adventure.
This is especially an issue because you are encouraged to craft a ton of items and to load up way more than you likely need for a given mission.
I found myself many many times trying to use all of my ladders and climbing anchors that I brought with me, just because I had crafted too many, and I didn't want to have a back fully-loaded of things that I wasn't using.
So I would make sure that I would drop all the ladders, all the climbing anchors, and everything that I had carried, to make sure that they were getting used.
If anything I ever built was interfering with the Chiral density or was making it so that the Chiral bandwidth was overloaded, I would just delete them.
And many times the game actually does this for you, which is why the timefall is kind of a cool gameplay mechanic.
Because it's a reason in game for items to deteriorate, and get deleted effectively after a certain amount of time, which forces you to go back over those areas, rebuild the things that you had previously put there.
But I don't think timefall degrades these items fast enough for you to feel as though you need to constantly be up keeping on all of the things that you've put into the world.
Furthermore I was almost never limited by resources when I was crafting these things.
After all, resources tend to be stored in the locations at which you're crafting items, so there's rarely ever a time where you find yourself short.
Only when building Road and bridges did I notice a need for extra materials.
But after a few quick trips to a MULE-camp and back to the home base to extract materials, all of this was fixed.
I experimented with some higher difficulty options to see if this would make item spawns or material spawns much lower to make this much more involved, to make it so you couldn't craft 4 ladders, 2 anchors, 2 boots, 2 gloves, 5 guns and 3 vehicles, all at the same time without ever feeling the impact of it.
And I'm sorry to report, the difficulty really only affects the combat and the damage that you receive and deal out.
It doesn't actually change much of anything as far as I can tell in terms of item spawns or anything like that.
Furthermore, you can also repair items and packaging.
If a road is degrading or if a bridge is breaking down, you can just repair it with some extra items.
Though I will be honest I never felt the need to do this in all my time with the game because the crafting cost of a brand new one was so low.
But now we get to the point where Death Stranding starts to kind of undo itself and unravel.
And this is my biggest late-game problem with Death Stranding in addition to the poor world design and also the lack of any sort of emotional tied to the world you're trying to save.
You see the gameplay system is fairly sparse to begin with, which isn't inherently bad.
After all anyone can boil anything down to its simplest parts.
You can say that Disco Elysium is just a walking simulator, or that Grand Theft Auto V is just a crime simulator.
In my eyes you can turn anything into a game as long as that thing is fun and fulfilling.
Hell, you can even make a farming game fun and relaxing.
So, my problem isn't with simplistic gameplay systems.
It's with systems that undermine themselves on a fundamental level.
And I know that this is a big accusation to levy against Death Stranding and I don't make it lightly, so allow me to argue my point.
The zip-line and the leveling system.
You see the zip-line in my opinion is far too useful.
It makes all other traversal techniques and mechanics completely obsolete.
You see once you set up a few zip-line routes, you have no need to ever craft ladders, to ever craft climbing anchors, all-terrain exoskeletons, it's all useless.
Because once you craft a couple of zip-lines at the highest peak and build your network out from there, you no longer have the need to interact with the lazily designed world.
All you do is dangle by your cuff link as you fly through the sky.
It bypasses all BT interactions, all MULE interactions, effectively negating the entire gameplay system that they just set up.
And I think Kojima Productions was actually aware of this and became aware of it at least later in development, which is why they added the Chiral bandwidth system in in the first place.
Because they realized if they allowed players to just build zip-lines everywhere, it would completely negate the need for crafting roads, building ladders, bridges, everything.
Now the obvious defense of these zip-lines as they are is that they're going to force players to appreciate the work of other players that you're going to use online zip-lines in addition to the zip-lines your crafting paired with the chiral bandwidth system This makes sure that you're dependent on other people.
But I would argue that this isn't the case, because roads which are introduced very early in the game require so many materials to construct.
They do this job.
Zip-lines are simply too cheap and easy to construct in order to make you feel truly dependent on other players.
In fact, because the placement of these online zip-lines seems so randomized as I discussed earlier, I found myself deleting online zip-lines multiple times because they were getting in the way of my own zip-line network.
If Kojima really wanted zip-lines to represent the ultimate cooperation between players, they should have been far more expensive to build, instead of just a level-2-PCC.
In my opinion, the fix to this would be to make roads far more important in the late game, and to have zip-lines completely cut or made far more expensive, on the same level of expense as roads.
These things are so cool, fast, and they bypass so much of the gameplay system just like the roads do, that they shouldn't be so carelessly added.
This is coming from somebody who has a huge network of zip-line set up in his safe file of the game.
I love the zip-lines, and I think they're far too useful.
Now I don't know when they added zip-lines to the game.
But it seems to me they were probably added later in development when they realized that the late-game map was going to be too vertical for roads.
This is likely one of the reasons why roads are discussed constantly in the first 10 to 15 hours of the game.
And then it seems like everybody forgets about them, and they start talking about zip-lines.
My guess is that this was because they realized roads and mountains don't mix very well, whereas zip-lines could be the ultimate fix all for navigating over mountaintops.
But to me this is no excuse.
All they had to do was make zip-lines more expensive in terms of materials.
And to make it so … perhaps … they require three players chiral IDs or something to construct.
Point is, there are ways they could have done this, to make sure that zip-lines weren't too useful, so that players would continue engaging with the core gameplay loop, that they had spent 30 to 35 hours engaging with previous.
Now I get it, you're giving players more options more tools to use in order to engage with the game, I get that.
But if players are given the chance to spam the gameplay loop, they will, for better, and worse.
And in this case, I think it's for worse.
And again it really seems that Kojima Productions were all aware of these systems becoming too useful.
They were scared that roads were too useful which is why they made them incredibly expensive to construct.
They were scared that vehicles were going to be too useful which is why they scattered almost every square inch of the map with rocks, and boulders, and rivers, to make sure that they were just tedious enough to use, that you wouldn't get reliant on them.
This is also why batteries are attached to every useful item in the game whether their speed exoskeletons, power exoskeletons, or the all-terrain ones.
All because they want you reliant on other players, and to make sure that you aren't bypassing all of the other gameplay systems.
After all, they could have made a truck or a snowmobile that made the mountain sections far easier.
But they didn't because those were supposed to be the difficult sections, which is why it's so strange to me that the zip-lines completely negate all of the mountain sections and make them ridiculously easy.
Now in addition to these zip-lines, the leveling system I think also undermines the gameplay progression, though I will be honest, in a much lesser degree.
You see every time you level up you can carry more.
You keep your balance better, it increases your stamina, your health, everything.
This is pretty common but it often means that the game becomes easier to play, the later you get into.
It this is actually one of the major criticisms I made of Assassin's Creed Odyssey that I made in my ultimate critique of that game, which by the way is just under three hours.
If … you're enjoying this video, I recommend that you check that one out after this as well.
The point is, that as the player becomes more powerful, they become less reliant on the gear and the items that you have been given, again, undermining those very items.
Now I want to shift gears a little bit, and talk about the broader implication of Death Stranding as Kojima described it.
He said the Death Stranding was going to become and was going to introduce a new type or genre of game.
In my opinion, he didn't do this.
Effectively the idea was that the world was going to be shared, at least in terms of the items that players will put in the world to share.
Now don't get me wrong, the Chiral Network and shared items are cool, but it doesn't actually feel like a revolution, at least I think in the way that Kojima intended.
Sure, it's helpful to have a zip-line already built in an area, but the developers limited the number of items that can be placed in a particular zone, so that it never feels particularly crowded.
And in concept, this is pretty simple and straightforward.
It's a world that's shared, but you can't actually see or find other players.
You only see traces of them, which makes you dependent on them.
And the game actually tries to turn this into some sort of profound statement, but I think it's just an attempt at explaining why other players are absent.
I don't know, you let me know in the comments.
And honestly having this in mind, why not have other players visible and present.
You could give them other skins, so that they don't look like Sam to avoid griefing.
And even have their movements recorded, and then played back in your world at a later time to prevent griefing nauseam.
This would be similar to what racing games do when you race against your friends even when they're offline you just play against a ghost of theirs.
This could make it so as you explore the world, you're actually seeing other Porter's delivering stuff.
And yeah, sure, now there are NPCs that you occasionally will see walking with weapons and things, but these are Non-Player-Controlled characters.
These are computer controlled, they are not other players.
And well, yes you can occasionally see a ghost of a player or signs that other players have left, this is not anywhere near on the level of having truly interactable players at least in my opinion.
The point is, they could have fully realized multiplayer systems in Death Stranding, and it wouldn't have disrupted the story or the gameplay.
So, why didn't they? Well it could have been technical, it could have been monetarily determined, it could have been that they didn't want to advertise it as an online game, it could have been that they were avoiding the PlayStation Plus requirement for online play, and that would have gone over the line.
Or it could have been simply that Kojima wanted the world to be empty.
Obviously, he stripped it of other life like the birds and the deer that we see in the opening, so maybe he meant all this to be empty, and lifeless.
Again, Kojima Syndrome.
I think could have really added to the game even just to have AI controlled NPCs wandering the wastes and delivering packages constantly.
You pass them on trails, you can speak with them, you can trade with them.
They might have a ladder, and you have a climbing anchor.
You need the ladder more, so you trade for it.
It could have made the world feel more alive, again, worth saving.
And this is my primary point of the section.
If this new genre of game is supposed to bring people together, it's ironic that it's done the exact opposite.
But all of this, thoroughly convinces me that this game was on a strict budget, and even was rushed out the door.
Allow me to argue my point.
To me it seems pretty clear.
Animals were cut from the game.
They went through the trouble of modeling and animating them for the opening sequence.
They must have been in the game at some point.
And they were completely cut later in development when it became clear that they were going to be too tedious to place carefully in the world, or perhaps they were making the world feel too alive, and it didn't feel like an apocalypse.
Either way, it looks as though they were cut.
And PC interactions after orders are almost all holographic and look objectively terrible.
These are all copy and pasted with different skins effectively and new voice actors, but they're all the same.
Bridges and Fragile housings buildings and environments are all copy and pasted across the entire game.
Very few vehicles, especially considering the variability of locations, snowy areas, rocky areas, River covered areas they're all highly variable.
And the vehicles that are there to offer transportation across these are nowhere near as variable.
There are areas on the outskirts of the map in the central area which are all glitchy and frankly terrible.
It shows that they put a lot of effort in polishing the central areas in the heavily trafficked areas, which is fair enough.
But it shows that there's a real lack of polish all over this game.
You just have to know where to look.
And all of this is too bad because it does really make you wonder what Death Stranding would have looked like if Kojima were given another year or so to work on it and a lot more money.
But that brings us to the question of Kojima's strengths and weaknesses, which, no doubt, there are plenty.
I figured what better way to end this critique of Death Stranding than to discuss the man himself.
You see Kojima does whatever he wants whenever he wants to.
That's kind of the whole point of him leaving Konami, is that now he is completely free.
However after playing through Death Stranding, I can't help but feel as though he desperately needs a dramaturg, or a co-director, to keep him in check.
I feel as though through the course of this video I've outlined a lot of reasons why Kojima needs to be restrained and needs to have somebody to deal with him in a much more mature way.
Because I honestly don't think he knows when to stop or when he's being ridiculous.
I could point to things such as the fourth wall breaks, all of the product placement, for AMC, and Monster Energy drinks.
There's a lot of really bad plot twists and a lot of the writing in here is so wordy.
It's hard to even follow what Kojima is trying to communicate.
Now I took a playwriting class a couple of years ago, and it was really interesting.
But one of the things that the teacher said on the first day of class was that new writers tend to write A LOT, whereas experienced writers tend to write WELL.
And I couldn't help but feel as though Kojima is a new writer.
He seems to just throw all of the spaghetti at the wall just hoping something sticks.
So instead of writing a monologue that's three sentences long, he'll write one that's 15 minutes long, and hope that you get something more significant from that.
I think it shows a certain amount of insecurity in his writing that he feels as though he can't communicate in as short a time as a lot of other writers could, such as Neil Druckmann, who wrote The Last Of Us, Uncharted 4, and is currently writing and directing The Last Of Us Part II.
Now listen, I loved PT, and that was all Kojima.
But it was a humble and confident Kojima.
It wasn't Kojima with something to prove having left to Konami.
And to be honest, I like humble Kojima more than this new one.
Now in that survey, I mentioned at the top of this video where over 2400 of you responded.
I asked you guys, what you thought of Hideo Kojima.
And many of you had some pretty varied opinions of him.
Here's a selection of some of the ones I thought were interesting and funny.
"He's an artistic genius who can't tell a coherent story." I think he's innovative and incredibly talented, but he fails to see criticism for what it is, and his fans think he can do no wrong.
He needed others to reign in his vision to make it more appealing.
He knows exactly what he wants to make and he doesn't waver.
He's an innovator, but not a hands-down genius.
He presents the most unique ideas for world building and characters, despite falling on rather generic writing tropes.
He's an excellent designer with ideas he doesn't know how to clearly express.
The very definition of an auteur.
He's a great visionary and original storyteller but a weak writer.
And then 57 of you guys said he's kind of insane.
Now all of this seems to coalesce into a consensus that he is a talented artist with a lot of really interesting original ideas.
But that he doesn't know when to stop and to delegate.
For instance, he has an original story idea, but he insists on writing out the macro, and the micro story elements himself, despite being objectively bad at writing dialogue.
And it's really too bad, because if Death Stranding were more lean, it could have appealed to a lot more people, and it could have made a much bigger splash.
So, in closing, Death Stranding is an enigma.
It's a game that I'm glad that I played, the one that's plagued with issues through and through.
And while I'm glad that Kojima got to pursue his passion project, I do hope that his next attempt is far more coherent, more polished, and much more fun.
But that's all from me.